
=head1 NAME

Poet::Manual::Configuring - Built-in Poet configuration options

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is a list of configuration keys used by Poet itself. These may be placed
in any L<Poet conf file|Poet::Conf/CONFIGURATION FILES>, e.g. C<local.cfg> or
C<conf/global/*.cfg>.

Entries like C<foo.bar> can be listed either in dot notation

    foo.bar: 5

or as part of a hash:

    foo:
       bar: 5

See L<Dot notation|Poet::Conf/Dot notation for hash access> for details.

=over

=item cache

The entire hash under this entry will be passed to
L<Poet::Cache-E<gt>config()|CHI/SUBCLASSING AND CONFIGURING CHI>. See
L<Poet::Cache|Poet::Cache/CONFIGURATION> for examples. e.g.

   cache:
      defaults:
         expires_variance: 0.2
      storage:
         file:
            driver: File
            root_dir: ${root}/data/cache
         memcached:
            driver: Memcached
            servers: ["10.0.0.15:11211", "10.0.0.15:11212"]
            compress_threshold: 4096
      namespace:
         /some/component:       { storage: file, expires_in: 5min }
         /some/other/component: { storage: memcached, expires_in: 1h }
         Some::Library:         { storage: memcached, expires_in: 10min } 

=item env.bin_dir, env.comps_dir, etc.

These entries affect what is returned from C<$poet-E<gt>bin_dir>,
C<$poet-E<gt>bin_path>, C<$poet-E<gt>comps_dir>, etc., and thus where various
Poet resources are kept. See L<Poet::Environment|Poet::Environment/CONFIGURING
ENVIRONMENT SUBDIRECTORIES>. For example, to move data and logs into external
directories outside the environment:

    env:
      data_dir: /some/external/data/dir
      logs_dir: /some/external/logs/dir

=item log.defaults, log.category

Specify the log level, output location, and layout string for logging, in the
default case and for particular categories respectively. See
L<Poet::Log|Poet::Log/CONFIGURATION> for examples. e.g.

    log:
      defaults:
        level: info
        output: poet.log
        layout: "%d{dd/MMM/yyyy:HH:mm:ss.SS} [%p] %c - %m - %F:%L - %P%n"
      class:
        CHI:
          level: debug
          output: chi.log
          layout: "%d{dd/MMM/yyyy:HH:mm:ss.SS} %m - %P%n"
        MyApp::Foo:
          output: stdout

=item log.log4perl_conf

Bypass Poet's simplified logging configuration and specify a log4perl conf file
directly. e.g.

    log:
      log4perl_conf: /path/to/log4perl.conf

=item mason

The hash under this entry will be treated as options that are passed to
C<Mason-E<gt>new> for the main Mason instance, overriding any default options.
See L<Poet::Mason|Poet::Mason/CONFIGURATION>. e.g.

    mason:
      static_source: 1
      static_source_touch_file: ${root}/data/purge.dat

=item server.default_content_type

Content type for requests that don't explicitly set one. Defaults to
C<text/html>.

=item server.host

The IP address to listen on.

=item server.load_modules

A list of modules to load on server startup, e.g.

    server.load_modules:
       - DBI
       - List::Util
       - MyApp::Foo
       - MyApp::Bar

=item server.port

The port to listen on.

=back
